# functionalproseriata
Swash zone selects functionally specialized assemblages of beach interstitial meiofauna (Platyhelminthes, Proseriata). Alejandro Martínez, Diego Fontaneto, Marco Curini-Galletti

The full code is included in the file: Martinezetal_beachproseriata_R1.R

The remain files are datafiles either containing raw data or results calculated by the script and saved in order to reduce computational times. They are fully explained in the script.



Marine sandy beaches are harsh environments characterized by steep environmental gradients defined by tidal ranges, sediments type, level of exposure to currents, and wave action. Reflective beaches impose the most hostile conditions, particularly in the wave-incidence zone (swash level). We here explore whether the rough hydrodynamics limits the number of species occurring in the swash level compared to the deeper shoaling and subtidal levels or if, instead, it does not affect species richness but rather selects for specific meiofaunal communities based on the presence of certain traits. We compare these two alternative scenarios using data from 152 proseriate (Platyhelminthes, Proseriata) species sampled over 116 reflective beaches in the Western Mediterranean. First, using spatially explicit models, we show that species richness does not differ across beach levels but depends on the characteristics of each beach. Second, we fit multivariate generalized linear models to demonstrate that species composition across beach levels depends on the species traits, in addition to geographical and abiotic factors. Third, using null modelling, we highlight that the overall species functional space has a lower richness than the expected one in the swash level but not in the shoaling and subtidal levels, suggesting an effect of trait-based ecological filtering in the swash level. Species functional contribution to the functional space is also higher in the swash level, reflecting a lower degree of functional redundancy. Finally, using binomial generalized linear models, we show that the observed differences in functional spaces depend on the higher frequency of hydrodynamics-related traits in the species of the swash level. Our results suggest that the hydrodynamics conditions in the swash level, rather that limiting biological diversity, favour a unique combination of species traits, which might be linked to ecological speciation in flatworms and also in other interstitial meiofaunal animals.
